What's New in NVDA


%!includeconf: ../changes.t2tconf

= 2013.1 =

== New Features ==
- Basic support for editing and reading Microsoft PowerPoint presentations. (#501)
- Basic support for reading and writing messages in Lotus Notes 8.5. (#543)
- In Browse mode for MSHTML (e.g. Internet Explorer) and Gecko (e.g. Firefox), the existance of long descriptions are now announced. It's also possible to open the long description in a new window by pressing NVDA+d. (#809)
- Notifications in Internet Explorer 9 and above are now spoken (such as content blocking or file downloads). (#2343)
- Automatic reporting of table row and column headers is now supported for browse mode documents in Internet Explorer and other MSHTML controls. (#778)
- New language: Aragonese
- New braille translation tables: Danish grade 2, Korean grade 1. (#2737)
- Support for braille displays connected via bluetooth on a computer running the Bluetooth Stack for Windows by Toshiba. (#2419)
- Support for port selection when using freedom Scientific displays (Automatic, USB or Bluetooth).
- Support for the BrailleNote family of notetakers from Humanware when acting as a braille terminal for a screen reader. (#2012)
- Support for older models of Papenmeier BRAILLEX braille displays. (#2679)
- Support for input of computer braille for braille displays which have a braille keyboard. (#808)
- New keyboard settings that allow  the choice for whether NVDA should interrupt speech for typed characters and or the Enter key. (#698)


== Changes ==
- Updated liblouis braille translator to 2.5.2. (#2737)


== Bug Fixes ==
- The quick navigation keys for jumping to the next or previous separator in Browse Mode now work in Internet Explorer and other MSHTML controls. (#2781)
- If NVDA falls back to eSpeak or  no speech due to a configured speech synthesizer failing when NVDA starts, the configuration is no longer updated to set the fallback synthesizer as the configured choice, meaning that now the original synthesizer will be tried again next time NVDA starts. (#2589)
- In browse mode in Mozilla applications, updates to tables are now rendered correctly. For example, in updated cells, row and column coordinates are reported and table navigation works as it should. (#2784)
- In browse mode in web browsers, certain clickable unlabelled graphics which weren't previously rendered are now rendered correctly. (#2838)
- Earlier and newer versions of SecureCRT are now supported. (#2800)
- For input  methods such as Easy Dots IME under XP, the reading string is now correctly reported.
- The candidate list in the Chinese Simplified Microsoft Pinyin input method under Windows 7 is now correctly read when changing pages with left and right arrow, and when first opening it with Home.
- When custom symbol pronunciation information is saved, the advanced "preserve" field is no longer removed. (#2852)
- When disabling automatic checking for updates, NVDA no longer has to be restarted in order for the change to fully take effect.
- NVDA no longer fails to start if an add-on cannot be removed due to its directory currently being in use by another application. (#2860)
- Tab labels in DropBox's preferences dialog can now be seen with Flat Review.
- If the input language is changed to something other than the default, NVDA now detects keys correctly for commands and input help mode.
- For languages such as German where the + (plus) sign is a single key on the keyboard, it is now possible to bind commands to it by using the word "plus". (#2898)
- In Internet Explorer and other MSHTML controls, block quotes are now reported where appropriate. (#2888)
- The HumanWare Brailliant BI/B series braille display driver can now be selected when the display is connected via Bluetooth but has never been connected via USB.
- Filtering elements in the Browse Mode Elements list with uppercase filter text now returns case-insensitive results just like lowercase rather than nothing at all. (#2951)
- In Mozilla browsers, browse mode can again be used when Flash content is focused. (#2546)


== Changes for Developers ==
- Braille display drivers can now support manual port selection. (#426)
 - This is most useful for braille displays which support connection via a legacy serial port.
 - This is done using the getPossiblePorts class method on the BrailleDisplayDriver class.
- Braille input from braille keyboards is now supported. (#808)
 - Braille input is encompassed by the brailleInput.BrailleInputGesture class or a subclass thereof.
 - Subclasses of braille.BrailleDisplayGesture (as implemented in braille display drivers) can also inherit from brailleInput.BrailleInputGesture. This allows display commands and braille input to be handled by the same gesture class.


= 2012.3 =
Highlights of this release include support for Asian character input; experimental support for touch screens on Windows 8; reporting of page numbers and improved support for tables in Adobe Reader; table navigation commands in focused table rows and Windows list-view controls; support for several more braille displays; and reporting of row and column headers in Microsoft Excel.

== New Features ==
- NVDA can now support Asian character input using IME and text service input methods in all applications, Including:
 - Reporting and navigation of candidate lists;
 - Reporting and navigation of composition strings; and
 - Reporting of reading strings.
- The presence of underline and strikethrough is now reported in Adobe Reader documents. (#2410)
- When the Windows Sticky Keys function is enabled, the NVDA modifier key will now behave like other modifier keys. This allows you to use the NVDA modifier key without needing to hold it down while you press other keys. (#230)
- Automatic reporting of column and row headers is now supported in Microsoft Excel. Press NVDA+shift+c to set the row containing column headers and NVDA+shift+r to set the column containing row headers. Press either command twice in quick succession to clear the setting. (#1519)
- Support for HIMS Braille Sense, Braille EDGE and SyncBraille braille displays. (#1266, #1267)
- When Windows 8 Toast notifications appear, NVDA will report them if reporting of help balloons is enabled. (#2143)
- Experimental support for Touch screens on Windows 8, including:
 - Reading text directly under your finger while moving it around
 - Many gestures for performing object navigation, text review, and other NVDA commands.
- Support for VIP Mud. (#1728)
- In Adobe Reader, if a table has a summary, it is now presented. (#2465)
- In Adobe Reader, table row and column headers can now be reported. (#2193, #2527, #2528)
- New languages: Amharic, Korean, Nepali, Slovenian.
- NVDA can now read auto complete suggestions when entering email addresses in Microsoft Outlook 2007. (#689)
- New eSpeak voice variants: Gene, Gene2. (#2512)
- In Adobe Reader, page numbers can now be reported. (#2534)
 - In Reader XI, page labels are reported where present, reflecting changes to page numbering in different sections, etc. In earlier versions, this is not possible and only sequential page numbers are reported.
- It is now possible to reset NVDA's configuration to factory defaults either by pressing NVDA+control+r three times quickly or by choosing Reset to Factory Defaults from the NVDA menu. (#2086)
- Support for the Seika Version 3, 4 and 5 and Seika80 braille displays from Nippon Telesoft. (#2452)
- The first and last top routing buttons on Freedom Scientific PAC Mate and Focus Braille displays can now be used to scroll  backward and forward. (#2556)
- Many more features are supported on Freedom Scientific Focus Braille displays such as advance bars, rocker bars and certain dot combinations for common actions. (#2516)
- In applications using IAccessible2 such as Mozilla applications, table row and column headers can now be reported outside of browse mode. (#926)
- Preliminary support for the document control in Microsoft Word 2013. (#2543)
- Text alignment can now be reported in applications using IAccessible2 such as Mozilla applications. (#2612)
- When a table row or standard Windows list-view control with multiple columns is focused, you can now use the table navigation commands to access individual cells. (#828)
- New braille translation tables: Estonian grade 0, Portuguese 8 dot computer braille, Italian 6 dot computer braille. (#2319, #2662)
- If NVDA is installed on the system, directly opening an NVDA add-on package (e.g. from Windows Explorer or after downloading in a web browser) will install it into NVDA. (#2306)
- Support for newer models of Papenmeier BRAILLEX braille displays. (#1265)
- Position information (e.g. 1 of 4) is now reported for Windows Explorer list items on Windows 7 and above. This also includes any UIAutomation controls that support the itemIndex and itemCount custom properties. (#2643)


== Changes ==
- In the NVDA Review Cursor preferences dialog, the Follow keyboard focus option has been renamed to Follow system focus for consistency with terminology used elsewhere in NVDA.
- When braille is tethered to review and the cursor is on an object which is not a text object (e.g. an editable text field), cursor routing keys will now activate the object. (#2386)
- The Save Settings On Exit option is now on by default for new configurations.
- When updating a previously installed copy of NVDA, the desktop shortcut key is no longer forced back to control+alt+n if it was manually changed to something different by the user. (#2572)
- The add-ons list in the Add-ons Manager now shows the package name before its status. (#2548)
- If installing the same or another version of a currently installed add-on, NVDA will ask if you wish to update the add-on, rather than just showing an error and aborting installation. (#2501)
- Object navigation commands (except the report current object command) now report with less verbosity. You can still obtain the extra information by using the report current object command. (#2560)
- Updated liblouis braille translator to 2.5.1. (#2319, #2480, #2662, #2672)
- The NVDA Key Commands Quick Reference document has been renamed to Commands Quick Reference, as it now includes touch commands as well as keyboard commands.
- The Elements list in Browse mode will now remember the last element type shown (e.g. links, headings or landmarks) each time the dialog is shown within the same session of NVDA. (#365)
- Most Metro apps in Windows 8 (e.g. Mail, Calendar) no longer activate Browse Mode for the entire app.
- Updated Handy Tech BrailleDriver COM-Server to 1.4.2.0.


== Bug Fixes ==
- In Windows Vista and later, NVDA no longer incorrectly treats the Windows key as being held down when unlocking Windows after locking it by pressing Windows+l. (#1856)
- In Adobe Reader, row headers are now correctly recognised as table cells; i.e. coordinates are reported and they can be accessed using table navigation commands. (#2444)
- In Adobe Reader, table cells spanning more than one column and/or row are now handled correctly. (#2437, #2438, #2450)
- The NVDA distribution package now checks its integrity before executing. (#2475)
- Temporary download files are now removed if downloading of an NVDA update fails. (#2477)
- NVDA will no longer freeze when it is running as an administrator while copying the user configuration to the system configuration (for use on Windows logon and other secure screens). (#2485)
- Tiles on the Windows 8 Start Screen are now presented better in speech and braille. The name is no longer repeated, unselected is no longer reported on all tiles, and live status information is presented  as the description of the tile (e.g. current temperature for the Weather tile).
- Passwords are no longer announced when reading password fields in Microsoft Outlook and other standard edit controls that are marked as protected. (#2021)
- In Adobe Reader, changes to form fields are now correctly reflected in browse mode. (#2529)
- Improvements to support for the Microsoft Word Spell Checker, including more accurate reading of the current spelling error, and the ability to support the spell checker when running an Installed copy of NVDA on Windows Vista or higher.
- Add-ons which include files containing non-English characters can now be installed correctly in most cases. (#2505)
- In Adobe Reader, the language of text is no longer lost when it is updated or scrolled to. (#2544)
- When installing an add-on, the confirmation dialog now correctly shows the localized name of the add-on if available. (#2422)
- In applications using UI Automation (such as .net and Silverlight applications), the calculation of numeric values for controls such as sliders has been corrected. (#2417)
- The configuration for reporting of progress bars is now honoured for the indeterminate progress bars displayed by NVDA when installing, creating a portable copy, etc. (#2574)
- NVDA commands can no longer be executed from a braille display while a secure Windows screen (such as the Lock screen) is active. (#2449)
- In browse mode, braille is now updated if the text being displayed changes. (#2074)
- When on a secure Windows screen such as the Lock screen, messages from applications speaking or displaying braille directly via NVDA are now ignored.
- In Browse mode, it is no longer possible to  fall off the bottom of the document with the right arrow key when on the final character, or by jumping to the end of a container when that container is the last item in the document. (#2463)
- Extraneous content is no longer incorrectly included when reporting the text of dialogs in web applications (specifically, ARIA dialogs with no aria-describedby attribute). (#2390)
- NVDA no longer incorrectly reports or locates certain edit fields in MSHTML documents (e.g. Internet Explorer), specifically where an explicit ARIA role has been used by the web page author. (#2435)
- The backspace key is now handled correctly when speaking typed words in Windows command consoles. (#2586)
- Cell coordinates in Microsoft Excel are now shown again in Braille.
- In Microsoft Word, NVDA no longer leaves you stuck on a paragraph with list formatting when trying to navigate out over a bullet or number with left arrow or control + left arrow. (#2402)
- In browse mode in Mozilla applications, the items in certain list boxes (specifically, ARIA list boxes) are no longer incorrectly rendered.
- In browse mode in Mozilla applications, certain controls that were rendered with an incorrect label or just whitespace are now rendered with the correct label.
- In browse mode in Mozilla applications, some extraneous whitespace has been eliminated.
- In browse mode in web browsers, certain graphics that are explicitly marked as presentational (specifically, with an alt="" attribute) are now correctly ignored.
- In web browsers, NVDA now hides content which is marked as hidden from screen readers (specifically, using the aria-hidden attribute). (#2117)
- Negative currency amounts (e.g. -$123) are now correctly spoken as negative, regardless of symbol level. (#2625)
- During say all, NVDA will no longer incorrectly revert to the default language where a line does not end a sentence. (#2630)
- Font information is now correctly detected in Adobe Reader 10.1 and later. (#2175)
- In Adobe Reader, if alternate text is provided, only that text will be rendered. Previously, extraneous text was sometimes included. (#2174)
- Where a document contains an application, the content of the application is no longer included in browse mode. This prevents unexpectedly moving inside the application when navigating. You can interact with the application in the same way as for embedded objects. (#990)
- In Mozilla applications, the value of spin buttons is now correctly reported when it changes. (#2653)
- Updated support for Adobe Digital Editions so that it works in version 2.0. (#2688)
- Pressing NVDA+upArrow while on a combo box in Internet Explorer and other MSHTML documents will no longer incorrectly read all items. Rather, just the active item will be read. (#2337)
- Speech dictionaries will now properly save when using a number (#) sign within the pattern or replacement fields. (#961)
- Browse mode for MSHTML documents (e.g. Internet Explorer) now correctly displays visible content contained within hidden content (specifically, elements with a style of visibility:visible inside an element with style visibility:hidden). (#2097)
- Links in Windows XP's Security Center no longer report random junk after their names. (#1331)
- UI Automation text controls (e.g.  the search field in the Windows 7 Start Menu) are now  correctly announced when moving the mouse over them rather than staying silent.
- Keyboard layout changes are no longer reported during say all, which was particularly problematic for multilingual documents including Arabic text. (#1676)
- The entire content of some UI Automation editable text controls (e.g. the Search Box in the Windows 7/8 Start Menu) is no longer announced every time it changes.
- When moving between groups on the Windows 8 start screen, unlabeled groups no longer announce their first tile as the name of the group. (#2658)
- When opening the Windows 8 start screen, the focus is correctly placed on the first tile, rather than jumping to the root of the start screen which can confuse navigation. (#2720)
- NVDA will no longer fail to start when the user's profile path contains certain multibyte characters. (#2729)
- In browse mode in Google Chrome, the text of tabs is now rendered correctly.
- In browse mode, menu buttons are now reported correctly.
- In OpenOffice.org/LibreOffice Calc, reading spreadsheet cells now works correctly. (#2765)
- NVDA can again function in the Yahoo! Mail message list when used from Internet Explorer. (#2780)


== Changes for Developers ==
- Previous log file is now copied to nvda-old.log on NVDA initialization. Therefore, if NVDA crashes or is restarted, logging information from that session is still accessible for inspection. (#916)
- Fetching the role property in chooseNVDAObjectOverlayClasses no longer causes the role to be incorrect and thus not reported on focus for certain objects such as Windows command consoles and Scintilla controls. (#2569)
- The NVDA Preferences, Tools and Help menus are now accessible as attributes on gui.mainFrame.sysTrayIcon named preferencesMenu, toolsMenu and helpMenu, respectively. This allows plugins to more easily add items to these menus.
- The navigatorObject_doDefaultAction script in globalCommands has been renamed to review_activate.
- Gettext message contexts are now supported. This allows multiple translations to be defined for a single English message depending on the context. (#1524)
 - This is done using the pgettext(context, message) function.
 - This is supported for both NVDA itself and add-ons.
 - xgettext and msgfmt from GNU gettext must be used to create any PO and MO files. The Python tools do not support message contexts.
 - For xgettext, pass the --keyword=pgettext:1c,2 command line argument to enable inclusion of message contexts.
 - See http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_node/Contexts.html#Contexts for more information.
- It is now possible to access built-in NVDA modules where they have been overridden by third party modules. See the nvdaBuiltin module for details.
- Add-on translation support can now be used within the add-on installTasks module. (#2715)

