# What's New in NVDA

## 2025.1

### Important notes

### New Features

* Support for math in PDFs has been added.
This works for formulas with associated MathML, such as some files generated by newer versions of TeX/LaTeX.
Currently this is only supported in Foxit Reader & Foxit Editor. (#9288, @NSoiffer)
* Commands to adjust the volume of other applications besides NVDA have been added.
To use this feature, "allow NVDA to control the volume of other applications" must be enabled in the audio settings panel. (#16052, @mltony, @codeofdusk)
  * `NVDA+alt+pageUp`: Increase the volume of all other applications.
  * `NVDA+alt+pageDown`: Decrease the volume of all other applications.
  * `NVDA+alt+delete`: Mute the volume of all other applications.
* When editing in Microsoft PowerPoint text boxes, you can now move per sentence with `alt+upArrow`/`alt+downArrow`. (#17015, @LeonarddeR)
* In Mozilla Firefox, NVDA will report the highlighted text when a URL containing a text fragment is visited. (#16910, @jcsteh)
* NVDA can now report when a link destination points to the current page. (#141, @LeonarddeR, @nvdaes)
* Added an action in the Add-on Store to cancel the install of add-ons. (#15578, @hwf1324)
* Added an action in the Add-on Store to retry the installation if the download/installation of an add-on fails. (#17090, @hwf1324)
* It is now possible to specify mirror URLs to use for NVDA updates and the Add-on Store. (#14974, #17151)
* The add-ons lists in the Add-on Store can be sorted by columns, including publication date, in ascending and descending order. (#15277, #16681, @nvdaes)
* When decreasing or increasing the font size in LibreOffice Writer using the corresponding keyboard shortcuts, NVDA announces the new font size. (#6915, @michaelweghorn)
* When applying the "Body Text" or a heading paragraph style using the corresponding keyboard shortcut in LibreOffice Writer 25.2 or newer, NVDA announces the new paragraph style. (#6915, @michaelweghorn)
* When toggling double underline in LibreOffice Writer using the corresponding keyboard shortcut, NVDA announces the new state ("double underline on"/"double underline off"). (#6915, @michaelweghorn)
* Automatic language switching is now supported when using Microsoft Speech API version 5 (SAPI5) and Microsoft Speech Platform voices. (#17146, @gexgd0419)
* NVDA can now be configured to speak the current line or paragraph when navigating with braille navigation keys. (#17053, @nvdaes)
* In Word, the selection update is now reported when using Word commands to extend or reduce the selection (`f8` or `shift+f8`). (#3293, @CyrilleB79)

### Changes

* The Report link destination, Character formatting information, and Speak selection dialogs, now include "Close" and "Copy" buttons for user convenience. (#17018, @XLTechie)
* The exit dialog now allows you to restart NVDA with add-ons disabled and debug logging enabled simultaneously. (#11538, @CyrilleB79)
* Unicode Normalization is now enabled by default for speech output. (#17017, @LeonarddeR).
  * You can still disable this functionality in the Speech category of the NVDA Settings dialog.
* Changes to the COM Registration Fixing Tool: (#12355, @XLTechie)
  * It now starts with a more user friendly explanation of its purpose, instead of a warning. (#12351)
  * The initial window can now be exited with `escape` or `alt+f4`. (#10799)
  * It will now show a message to the user, including the error, in the rare event of a Windows error while attempting COM re-registrations.
* In Word and Outlook the result of more font formatting shortcuts is now reported. (#10271, @CyrilleB79)
* Default input and output braille tables can now be determined based on the NVDA language. (#17306, #16390, #290, @nvdaes)
* In Microsoft Word, when using the "report focus" command, the document layout will be announced if this information is available and reporting object descriptions is enabled. (#15088, @nvdaes)
* NVDA will now only warn about add-on incompatibility when updating to a version which has an incompatible add-on API to the currently installed copy. (#17071)
* Added commands to move the review cursor to the first and last character of the selected text, assigned to `NVDA+alt+home` and `NVDA+alt+end`, respectively. (#17299, @nvdaes)
* Component updates:
  * Updated LibLouis Braille translator to [3.32.0](https://github.com/liblouis/liblouis/releases/tag/v3.32.0). (#17469, @LeonarddeR)
  * Updated CLDR to version 46.0. (#17484, @OzancanKaratas)

### Bug Fixes

* Math reading has been fixed for some web elements.
Specifically, MathML inside of span and other elements that have the attribute `role="math"`. (#15058)
* Native support for the Dot Pad tactile graphics device from Dot Inc as a multiline braille display. (#17007)
* Improvements when editing in Microsoft PowerPoint:
  * Caret reporting no longer breaks when text contains wide characters, such as emoji. (#17006 , @LeonarddeR)
  * Character location reporting is now accurate (e.g. when pressing `NVDA+Delete`. (#9941, @LeonarddeR)
* When using the Seika Notetaker, space and space with dots gestures are now displayed correctly in the Input Gestures dialog. (#17047, @school510587)
* Configuration profiles:
  * Braille is no longer dysfunctional when activating 'say all' with an associated configuration profile. (#17163, @LeonarddeR)
  * Fixed an issue where certain settings were explicitly saved to the active configuration profile even when the value of that setting was equal to the value in the base configuration. (#17157, @leonarddeR)
* NVDA is able to read the popup submenu items on Thunderbird search results page. (#4708, @thgcode)
* NVDA should no longer play error sounds or spam the log file when using the display speech output braille mode while no braille display is connected. (#17092, @Emil-18)
* The COM Registration Fixing Tool no longer reports success on failure. (#12355, @XLTechie)
* When using the Microsoft Pinyin Input Method for Chinese and enabling the Pinyin compatibility option to use the previous version, typing in LibreOffice Writer (and potentially other applications) while an IME popup is showing no longer triggers an error. (#17198, @michaelweghorn)
* In LibreOffice, the current checkbox state (checked/unchecked) is now also reported in braille, not just speech. (#17218, @michaelweghorn)
* When spelling, unicode normalization now works more appropriately:
  * After reporting a normalized character, NVDA no longer incorrectly reports subsequent characters as normalized. (#17286, @LeonarddeR)
  * Composite characters (such as é) are now reported correctly. (#17295, @LeonarddeR)
* The command to Report the destination URL of a link now works as expected when using the legacy object model in Microsoft Word, Outlook and Excel. (#17292, #17362, @CyrilleB79)
* NVDA will no longer announce Windows 11 clipboard history entries when closing the window while items are present. (#17308, @josephsl)
* If the plugins are reloaded while a browseable message is opened, NVDA will no longer fail to report subsequent focus moves. (#17323, @CyrilleB79)
* When using applications such as Skype, Discord, Signal and Phone Link for audio communication, NVDA speech and sounds no longer decrease in volume. (#17349, @jcsteh)
* Opening the NVDA Python Console will no longer fail in case an error occurs while retrieving snapshot variables. (#17391, @CyrilleB79)
* In Notepad and other UIA documents, and Notepad++ documents on Windows 11, if the last line is empty, the "braille next line command" will move the cursor to the last line.
In any document, if the cursor is on the last line, it will be moved to the end when using this command.
(#17251, #17430, @nvdaes)

### Changes for Developers

Please refer to [the developer guide](https://www.nvaccess.org/files/nvda/documentation/developerGuide.html#API) for information on NVDA's API deprecation and removal process.

* Note: this is an Add-on API compatibility breaking release.
Add-ons will need to be re-tested and have their manifest updated.
* Component updates:
  * Updated Ruff to 0.8.1. (#17102, #17260, #17473)
  * Updated Comtypes to 1.4.6. (#17061, @LeonarddeR)
  * Updated wxPython to 4.2.2. (#17181, @dpy013)
  * Updated SCons to 4.8.1. (#17254)
  * Updated sphinx to 8.1.2 and sphinx-rtd-theme to 3.0.1. (#17284, @josephsl)
  * Updated Robot Framework to 7.1.1. (#17329, @josephsl)
  * Updated configobj to 5.1.0 commit `8be5462`. (#17328)
  * Updated pre-commit to 4.0.1. (#17260)
  * Updated typing-extensions to 4.12.2. (#17438, @josephsl)
  * Updated licensecheck to 2024.3. (#17440, @josephsl)
  * Updated markdown to 3.7. (#17459, @josephsl)
  * Updated nh3 0.2.19. (#17465, @josephsl)
  * Updated nuitka to 2.5.4. (#17458, @josephsl)
  * Updated schedule to 1.2.2. (#17455, @josephsl)
  * Updated requests to 2.32.3. (#17456, @josephsl)
* `ui.browseableMessage` may now be called with options to present a button for copying to clipboard, and/or a button for closing the window. (#17018, @XLTechie)
* Several additions to identify link types (#16994, @LeonarddeR, @nvdaes)
  * A new `utils.urlUtils` module with different functions to determine link types
  * A new `INTERNAL_LINK` state has been added to `controlTypes.states.State`
  * A new `linkType` property has been added on `NVDAObject`.
  It queries the `treeInterceptor` by default, if any.
  * `BrowseModeTreeInterceptor` object has a new `documentUrl` property
  * `BrowseModeTreeInterceptor` object has a new `getLinkTypeInDocument` method which accepts an URL to check the link type of the object
  * A `toggleBooleanValue` helper function has been added to `globalCommands`.
  It can be used in scripts to report the result when a boolean is toggled in `config.conf`
* Removed the requirement to indent function parameter lists by two tabs from NVDA's Coding Standards, to be compatible with modern automatic linting. (#17126, @XLTechie)
* Added the [VS Code workspace configuration for NVDA](https://nvaccess.org/nvaccess/vscode-nvda) as a git submodule. (#17003)
* In the `brailleTables` module, a `getDefaultTableForCurrentLang` function has been added (#17222, @nvdaes)
* Retrieving the `labeledBy` property now works for:
  * objects in applications implementing the `labelled-by` IAccessible2 relation. (#17436, @michaelweghorn)
  * UIA elements supporting the corresponding `LabeledBy` UIA property. (#17442, @michaelweghorn)
* Added the following extension points (#17428, @ctoth):
  * `inputCore.decide_handleRawKey`: called on each keypress
  * `speech.extensions.post_speechPaused`: called when speech is paused or unpaused

#### API Breaking Changes

These are breaking API changes.
Please open a GitHub issue if your add-on has an issue with updating to the new API.

* The `addonStore.network.BASE_URL` constant has been removed.
As the Add-on Store base URL is now configurable directly within NVDA, no replacement is planned. (#17099)
* The `updateCheck.CHECK_URL` constant has been removed.
As the NVDA update check URL is now configurable directly within NVDA, no replacement is planned. (#17151)
* `NVDAObjects.UIA.winConsoleUIA.WinTerminalUIA` has been removed with no public replacement. (#14047, #16820, @codeofdusk)
* `NVDAObjects.IAccessible.ia2TextMozilla.FakeEmbeddingTextInfo` has been removed. (#16768, @jcsteh)
* The following symbols in `appModules.soffice` have been renamed (#6915, @michaelweghorn):
  * `SymphonyDocument.announceToolbarButtonToggle` to `SymphonyDocument.announceFormattingGestureChange`
  * `SymphonyDocument.script_toggleTextAttribute` to `SymphonyDocument.script_changeTextFormatting`
* The `space` keyword argument for `brailleDisplayDrivers.seikantk.InputGesture` now expects an `int` rather than a `bool`. (#17047, @school510587)
* The `[upgrade]` configuration section including `[upgrade][newLaptopKeyboardLayout]` has been removed. (#17191)
* In `NVDAObjects.window.scintilla.ScintillaTextInfo`, if no text is selected, the `collapse` method is overriden to expand to line if the `end` parameter is set to `True` (#17431, @nvdaes)

#### Deprecations

* The `braille.filter_displaySize` extension point is deprecated.
Please use `braille.filter_displayDimensions` instead. (#17011)

## 2024.4.1

This is a patch release to fix a bug when saving speech symbol dictionaries.

### Bug fixes

* Fixed bug where speech symbols dictionaries were not saved and the dialog would not be closed. (#17344)

## 2024.4

This release includes a number of improvements in Microsoft Office, braille, and document formatting.

In Word or Excel, it is now possible to double-press the comment gesture to read the comment or note in a browsable dialog.
You can now use the review cursor selection command to select text in PowerPoint.
NVDA also no longer brailles garbage characters when showing row or column header text in tables in Word when using the object model.

NVDA can now be configured to report font attributes in speech and braille separately.

A new setting has been added to configure the timeout to perform a multiple press gesture, such as the report time/date command.

You can now configure how NVDA shows text formatting in braille, and set NVDA to show the start of paragraphs in braille.
NVDA can now speak the character at the cursor when performing a braille cursor routing action.
Cursor routing reliability has been improved, and support for routing keys in PowerPoint has been added.
All lines of cells will now be used when using a multi-line braille display via HID braille.
NVDA is no longer unstable after restarting NVDA during an automatic Braille Bluetooth scan.

The minimum required version of Poedit that works with NVDA is now version 3.5.

eSpeak NG has been updated, adding support for the Faroese and Xextan languages.

LibLouis has been updated, adding new Braille tables for Thai and Greek international braille with single-cell accented letters.

There have also been a number of fixes, including to mouse tracking in Firefox, and the on-demand speech mode.

### New Features

* New braille features:
  * It is now possible to change the way NVDA displays certain text formatting attributes in braille.
    The available options are:
    * Liblouis (default): Uses formatting markers defined in the selected braille table.
    * Tags: Uses start and end tags to denote where certain font attributes begin and end. (#16864)
  * When the "Read by paragraph" option is enabled, NVDA can now be configured to indicate the start of paragraphs in braille. (#16895, @nvdaes)
  * When performing a braille cursor routing action, NVDA can now automatically speak the character at the cursor. (#8072, @LeonarddeR)
    * This option is disabled by default.
      You can enable "Speak character when routing cursor in text" in NVDA's braille settings.
* The comment command in Microsoft Word and notes command in Microsoft Excel can now be pressed twice to show the comment or note in a browsable message. (#16800, #16878, @Cary-Rowen)
* NVDA can now be configured to report font attributes in speech and braille separately. (#16755)
* The timeout to perform a multiple keypress is now configurable; this may be especially useful for people with dexterity impairment. (#11929, @CyrilleB79)

### Changes

* The `-c`/`--config-path` and `--disable-addons` command line options are now respected when launching an update from within NVDA. (#16937)
* Component updates:
  * Updated LibLouis Braille translator to [3.31.0](https://github.com/liblouis/liblouis/releases/tag/v3.31.0). (#17080, @LeonarddeR, @codeofdusk)
    * Fixed translation of numbers in Spanish Braille.
    * New Braille tables:
      * Thai grade 1
      * Greek international Braille (single-cell accented letters)
    * Renamed tables:
      * "Thai 6 dot" was renamed to "Thai grade 0" for consistency reasons.
      * The existing "Greek international braille" table was renamed to "Greek international braille (2-cell accented letters)" to clarify the distinction between the two Greek systems.
  * eSpeak NG has been updated to 1.52-dev commit `961454ff`. (#16775)
    * Added new languages Faroese and Xextan.
* When using a multi-line braille display via the standard HID braille driver, all lines of cells will be used. (#16993, @alexmoon)
* The stability of NVDA's Poedit support has been improved with the side effect that the minimum required version of Poedit is now version 3.5. (#16889, @LeonarddeR)

### Bug Fixes

* Braille fixes:
  * It is now possible to use braille display routing keys to move the text cursor in Microsoft PowerPoint. (#9101)
  * When accessing Microsoft Word without UI Automation, NVDA no longer outputs garbage characters in table headers defined with the set row and column header commands. (#7212)
  * The Seika Notetaker driver now correctly generates braille input for space, backspace and dots with space/backspace gestures. (#16642, @school510587)
  * Cursor routing is now much more reliable when a line contains one or more Unicode variation selectors or decomposed characters. (#10960, @mltony, @LeonarddeR)
  * NVDA no longer throws an error when panning the braille display forward in some empty edit controls. (#12885)
  * NVDA is no longer unstable after restarting NVDA during an automatic Braille Bluetooth scan. (#16933)
* It is now possible to use the review cursor selection commands to select text in Microsoft PowerPoint. (#17004)
* In on-demand speech mode, NVDA does not talk any more when a message is opened in Outlook, when a new page is loaded in a browser, or when displaying a new slide in a PowerPoint slideshow. (#16825, @CyrilleB79)
* In Mozilla Firefox, moving the mouse over text before or after a link now reliably reports the text. (#15990, @jcsteh)
* NVDA no longer occasionally fails to open browsable messages (such as pressing `NVDA+f` twice). (#16806, @LeonarddeR)
* Updating NVDA while add-on updates are pending no longer results in the add-on being removed. (#16837)
* It is now possible to interact with Data validation dropdown lists in Microsoft Excel 365. (#15138)
* NVDA is no longer as sluggish when arrowing up and down through large files in VS Code. (#17039)
* NVDA no longer becomes unresponsive after holding down an arrow key for a long time while in browse mode, particularly in Microsoft Word and Microsoft Outlook. (#16812)
* NVDA no longer reads the last line when the cursor is on the second-last line of a multiline edit control in Java applications. (#17027)

### Changes for Developers

Please refer to [the developer guide](https://www.nvaccess.org/files/nvda/documentation/developerGuide.html#API) for information on NVDA's API deprecation and removal process.

* Component updates:
  * Updated py2exe to 0.13.0.2 (#16907, @dpy013)
  * Updated setuptools to 72.0 (#16907, @dpy013)
  * Updated Ruff to 0.5.6. (#16868, @LeonarddeR)
  * Updated nh3 to 0.2.18 (#17020, @dpy013)
* Added a `.editorconfig` file to NVDA's repository in order for several IDEs to pick up basic NVDA code style rules by default. (#16795, @LeonarddeR)
* Added support for custom speech symbol dictionaries. (#16739, #16823, @LeonarddeR)
  * Dictionaries can be provided in locale specific folders in an add-on package, e.g. `locale\en`.
  * Dictionary metadata can be added to an optional `symbolDictionaries` section in the add-on manifest.
  * Please consult the [Custom speech symbol dictionaries section in the developer guide](https://www.nvaccess.org/files/nvda/documentation/developerGuide.html#AddonSymbolDictionaries) for more details.
* It is now possible to redirect objects retrieved from on-screen coordinates, by using the `NVDAObject.objectFromPointRedirect` method. (#16788, @Emil-18)
* Running SCons with the parameter `--all-cores` will automatically pick the maximum number of available CPU cores. (#16943, #16868, @LeonarddeR)
* Developer info now includes information on app architecture (such as AMD64) for the navigator object. (#16488, @josephsl)

#### Deprecations

* The `bool` configuration key `[documentFormatting][reportFontAttributes]` is deprecated for removal in 2025.1, instead use `[fontAttributeReporting]`. (#16748)
  * The new key has an `int` value matching an `OutputMode` `enum` with options for speech, braille, speech and braille and off.
  * API consumers can use the `bool` value as previously, or check the `OutputMode` if handling speech or braille specifically.
  * These keys are currently synchronized until 2025.1.
* `NVDAObjects.UIA.InaccurateTextChangeEventEmittingEditableText` is deprecated with no replacement. (#16817, @LeonarddeR)

## 2024.3.1

This is a patch release to fix a bug with the automatic add-on update notification.

### Bug Fixes

* When automatically checking for add-on updates, NVDA no longer freezes on poor connections. (#17036)

## 2024.3

The Add-on Store will now notify you if any add-on updates are available on NVDA startup.

There are now options to apply Unicode normalization to speech and braille output.
This can be useful when reading characters that are unknown to a particular speech synthesizer or braille table and which have a compatible alternative, like the bold and italic characters commonly used on social media.
It also allows reading of equations in the Microsoft Word equation editor.

Help Tech Activator Pro braille displays are now supported.

Unassigned commands have been added to scroll the mouse wheel vertically and horizontally.

There are several bug fixes, particularly for the Windows 11 Emoji Panel and Clipboard history.
For web browsers, there are fixes for reporting error messages, figures, captions, table labels and checkbox/radio button menu items.

LibLouis has been updated, adding new Braille tables for Cyrillic Serbian, Yiddish, several ancient languages, Turkish, and the International Phonetic Alphabet.
eSpeak has been updated, adding support for the Karakalpak language.
Unicode CLDR has also been updated.

### New Features

* New key commands:
  * Added unassigned commands for vertical and horizontal scrolling of the mouse wheel, to enhance navigation on web pages and apps with dynamic content, such as Dism++. (#16462, @Cary-Rowen)
* Added support for Unicode Normalization to speech and braille output. (#11570, #16466 @LeonarddeR).
  * This can be useful when reading characters that are unknown to a particular speech synthesizer or braille table and which have a compatible alternative, like the bold and italic characters commonly used on social media.
  * It also allows reading of equations in the Microsoft Word equation editor. (#4631)
  * You can enable this functionality for both speech and braille in their respective settings categories in the NVDA Settings dialog.
* By default, after NVDA startup, you will be notified if any add-on updates are available. (#15035)
  * This can be disabled in the "Add-on Store" category of settings.
  * NVDA checks daily for add-on updates.
  * Only updates within the same channel will be checked (e.g. installed beta add-ons will only notify for updates in the beta channel).
* Added support for the Help Tech Activator Pro displays. (#16668)

### Changes

* Component updates:
  * eSpeak NG has been updated to 1.52-dev commit `54ee11a79`. (#16495)
    * Added new language Karakalpak.
  * Updated Unicode CLDR to version 45.0. (#16507, @OzancanKaratas)
  * Updated fast_diff_match_patch (used to detect changes in terminals and other dynamic content) to version 2.1.0. (#16508, @codeofdusk)
  * Updated LibLouis braille translator to [3.30.0](https://github.com/liblouis/liblouis/releases/tag/v3.30.0). (#16652, @codeofdusk)
    * New braille tables:
      * Cyrillic Serbian.
      * Yiddish.
      * Several ancient languages: Biblical Hebrew, Akkadian, Syriac, Ugaritic and transliterated Cuneiform text.
      * Turkish grade 2. (#16735)
      * International Phonetic Alphabet. (#16773)
  * Updated NSIS to 3.10 (#16674, @dpy013)
  * Updated markdown to 3.6 (#16725, @dpy013)
  * Updated nh3 to 0.2.17 (#16725, @dpy013)
* The fallback braille input table is now equal to the fallback output table, which is Unified English Braille Code grade 1. (#9863, @JulienCochuyt, @LeonarddeR)
* NVDA will now report figures with no accessible children, but with a label or description. (#14514)
* When reading by line in browse mode, "caption" is no longer reported on each line of a long figure or table caption. (#14874)
* In the Python console, the last unexecuted command will no longer be lost when moving in the input history. (#16653, @CyrilleB79)
* A unique anonymous ID is now sent as part of optional NVDA usage statistics gathering. (#16266)
* By default, a new folder will be created when making a portable copy.
A warning message will inform you if you try writing to a non-empty directory. (#16686)

### Bug Fixes

* Windows 11 fixes:
  * NVDA will no longer appear to get stuck when closing the clipboard history and emoji panel. (#16346, #16347, @josephsl)
  * NVDA will announce visible candidates again when opening the IME interface. (#14023, @josephsl)
  * NVDA will no longer announce "clipboard history" twice when navigating through the emoji panel menu items. (#16532, @josephsl)
  * NVDA will no longer cut off speech and braille when reviewing kaomojis and symbols in the emoji panel. (#16533, @josephsl)
* Web browser fixes:
  * Error messages referenced with `aria-errormessage` are now reported in Google Chrome and Mozilla Firefox. (#8318)
  * If present, NVDA will now use `aria-labelledby` to provide accessible names for tables in Mozilla Firefox. (#5183)
  * NVDA will correctly announce radio and checkbox menu items when first entering sub-menus in Google Chrome and Mozilla Firefox. (#14550)
  * NVDA's browse mode find functionality is now more accurate when the page contains emojis. (#16317, @LeonarddeR)
  * In Mozilla Firefox, NVDA now correctly reports the current character, word and line when the cursor is at the insertion point at the end of a line. (#3156, @jcsteh)
  * No longer cause Google Chrome to crash when closing a document or exiting Chrome. (#16893)
* NVDA will announce correctly the autocomplete suggestions in Eclipse and other Eclipse-based environments on Windows 11. (#16416, @thgcode)
* Improved reliability of automatic text readout, particularly in terminal applications. (#15850, #16027, @Danstiv)
* It is once again possible to reset the configuration to factory defaults reliably. (#16755, @Emil-18)
* NVDA will correctly announce selection changes when editing a cell's text in Microsoft Excel. (#15843)
* In applications using Java Access Bridge, NVDA will now correctly read the last blank line of a text instead of repeating the previous line. (#9376, @dmitrii-drobotov)
* In LibreOffice Writer (version 24.8 and newer), when toggling text formatting (bold, italic, underline, subscript/superscript, alignment) using the corresponding keyboard shortcut, NVDA announces the new formatting attribute (e.g. "Bold on", "Bold off"). (#4248, @michaelweghorn)
* When navigating with the cursor keys in text boxes in applications which use UI Automation, NVDA no longer sometimes reports the wrong character, word, etc. (#16711, @jcsteh)
* When pasting into the Windows 10/11 Calculator, NVDA now correctly reports the full number pasted. (#16573, @TristanBurchett)
* Speech is no longer silent after disconnecting from and reconnecting to a Remote Desktop session. (#16722, @jcsteh)
* Support added for text review commands for an object's name in Visual Studio Code. (#16248, @Cary-Rowen)
* Playing NVDA sounds no longer fails on a mono audio device. (#16770, @jcsteh)
* NVDA will report addresses when arrowing through To/CC/BCC fields in outlook.com / Modern Outlook. (#16856)
* NVDA now handles add-on installation failures more gracefully. (#16704)

### Changes

* The keyboard settings for "Speak typed characters" and "Speak typed words" now have three options: Off, On, and Only in edit controls, replacing the previous On/Off toggles. (#xxxxx)

### Changes for Developers

* Changed keyboard typing echo configuration from boolean to integer values:
  * `keyboard.speakTypedCharacters` and `keyboard.speakTypedWords` now use integer values (0=Off, 1=On, 2=Only in edit controls) instead of boolean values in `configSpec.py`.
  * Added `TypingEcho` enum in `config.configFlags` to represent these modes.
  * Updated `speech.speakTypedCharacters()`, keyboard commands and settings dialog to use the new enum. (#xxxxx)
