Што е ново во НВДА


%!includeconf: ../changes.t2tconf

= 2017.4 =

== Новите функции ==
- In browse mode, it is now possible to skip past/to the start of landmarks using the skip to end/beginning of container commands (comma/shift+comma). (#5482)
- In Firefox, Chrome and Internet Explorer, quick navigation to edit fields and form fields now includes editable rich text content (I.e. contentEditable). (#5534)
- In web browsers, the Elements List can now list form fields and buttons. (#588)
- Initial support for Windows 10 on ARM64. (#7508)
- Early support for reading and interactive navigation of mathematical content for Kindle books with accessible math. (#7536)
- Added support for Azardi e-book reader. (#5848)
- Version information for addons is now reported when being updated. (#5324)
- Added support for new command line parameters to create a portable copy of NVDA. (#6329)
- Support for Microsoft Edge running within Windows Defender Application Guard (#7600)
- If running on a laptop or tablet, NVDA will now report when a charger is connected/disconnected, and when the screen orientation changes. (#4574, #4612)


== Промени ==
- The minimum supported Operating System for NVDA is now Windows 7 with Service Pack 1, or Windows Server 2008 R2 with Service Pack 1. (#7546)
- Web dialogs in Firefox and Chrome web browsers now automatically use browse Mode, unless inside of a web application. (#4493)
- In browse mode, tabbing and moving with quick navigation commands no longer announces jumping out of containers such as lists and tables, which makes navigating more efficient. (#2591)
- In Browse mode for Firefox and Chrome, the name of form field groups are now announced when moving into them with quick navigation or when tabbing. (#3321)
- In browse mode, the quick navigation command for embedded objects (o and shift+o) now includes audio and video elements as well as elements with the aria roles application and dialog. (#7239)
- Espeak-ng has been updated (to commit 01919cd48a566cdf34347784b2e74554b376e900), this resolves some issues with producing release builds. (#7385)
- On the third activation of the 'read status bar' command, it's contents is copied to the clipboard. (#1785)
- When assigning gestures to keys on a Baum display, you can limit them to the model of the braille display in use (e.g. VarioUltra or Pronto). (#7517)
- The hotkey for the filter field in the elements list in browse mode is changed from alt+f to alt+e. (#7569)


== Исправки на грешките ==
- Links are now indicated in braille in applications such as Microsoft Word. (#6780)
- NVDA no longer becomes noticeably slower when many tabs are open in either Firefox or Chrome web browsers. (#3138)
- Cursor routing for the MDV Lilli Braille display no longer incorrectly moves one braille cell ahead of where it should be. (#7469)
- In Internet Explorer and other MSHTML documents, the HTML5 required attribute is now supported to indicate the required state of a form field. (#7321)
- Braille displays are now updated when typing Arabic characters in a left-aligned WordPad document (#511).
- Accessible labels for controls in Mozilla Firefox are now more readily reported in browse mode when the label does not appear as content itself. (#4773)
- On windows 10 Creaters Update, NVDA can again access Firefox after a restart of NVDA. (#7269)
- When restarting NVDA with Mozilla Firefox in focus, browse mode will again be available, though you may need to alt+tab away and back again. (#5758)
- It is now possible to access math content in Google Chrome on a system with out Mozilla Firefox installed. (#7308)
- The Operating System and other applications should be more stable directly after installing NVDA before rebooting, as compaired with installs of previous NVDA versions. (#7563)
- When using a content recognition command (e.g. NVDA+r), NVDA now reports an error message instead of nothing if the navigator object has disappeared. (#7567)


== Измени за програмерите ==
Информациите за програмери не се преведени, ве молиме, погледнете [англијска верзија на овој документ ../en/changes.html].
= Постари верзии =

Информациите за постарите верзии не се преведени, ве молиме, ’погледнете [англијска верзија на овој документ ../en/changes.html].
